[Blog] Simplifying releases with Rust (#1591)
simplabs/simplabs.github.io: _posts/2021-10-18-automating-ember-learning-releases-with-rust.md

---
title: 'Automating Ember Core Learning Team releases with Rust'
author: 'Ricardo Mendes'
github: locks
twitter: locks
topic: ember
bio: 'Senior Frontend Engineer, Ember Framework and Learning Core teams member'
description:
  'Ricardo Mendes discusses a command like tool built in Rust that automates the releases process for the Ember Core Learning Team'
og:
  image: /assets/images/posts/2021-07-13-effective-infrastructure-for-efficient-development-workflows/og-image.png
---

It's not trivial to release a new version of Ember. This process involves several different core

> teams, Framework, Data, CLI and Learning and several libraries and resources. In this post Ricardo will show you how they're building a tool in Rust to automate the process for the Core Learning Team.

Author: Good point. I'll confirm and do a full on the article afterwards.

<!--break-->

![Effective infrastructure for efficient development workflows illustration](/assets/images/posts/2021-07-13-effective-infrastructure-for-efficient-development-workflows/illustration.svg#full)

> ## How do Ember project releases work

Reviewer: I like it

An Ember project release involves 4 different Core teams, Framework, Data, CLI
and Learning, and is usually done over the period of a week. This is so because

> some packages or projects require overs to have been published beforehand. The

Reviewer: Not sure what do you mean by _overs_ here. Do you refer to dependencies/dependents?

> steps are as follows:

Reviewer: :nail I would use a numbered list since each step depends on the previous one:

1. ...
2. ...
3. ...
4. ...

> - The Framework team releases the new version of the Ember npm package,
>   [ember-source](https://www.npmjs.com/package/ember-source).

Reviewer: 💡 I would explain what does this package contain. From the ones outside the Ember world is not obvious (I had to enter into Github's link to see Ember is a multi-package project and it's not clear to me in 2 clicks what is inside)
 
```suggestion
- The Framework team releases the new version of the Ember npm package,
  [ember-source](https://www.npmjs.com/package/ember-source) which contains .........
```

> - The Data team updates their dependency on `ember-source`, tests that
>   everything is working as expected and releases a new version of
>   [ember-data](https://www.npmjs.com/package/ember-data).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The Data team updates their dependency on `ember-source`, tests that
  everything is working as expected and releases a new version of
  [ember-data](https://www.npmjs.com/package/ember-data). `ember-data` is the package in charge of...
```

- The CLI team updates the `ember-source` and `ember-data` dependencies in the

>   blueprints, tests that everything works as expected and releases a new version

Reviewer: I assume you refer to this: https://cli.emberjs.com/release/advanced-use/blueprints/ ?
```suggestion
  [blueprints](https://cli.emberjs.com/release/advanced-use/blueprints/), tests that everything works as expected and releases a new version
```

Author: I added direct links to the relevant app and addon blueprints. I think that's more relevant than the documentation. What do you think?

> - The CLI team updates the `ember-source` and `ember-data` dependencies in the
>   blueprints, tests that everything works as expected and releases a new version
>   of [ember-cli](https://www.npmjs.com/package/ember-cli).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The CLI team updates the `ember-source` and `ember-data` dependencies in the
  blueprints, tests that everything works as expected and if it does, releases a new version
  of [ember-cli](https://www.npmjs.com/package/ember-cli).
```

- The Learning team releases the relevant versions of the
  [Guides](https://guides.emberjs.com/) and the
  [API documentation](https://api.emberjs.com/ember/release), updates the
  [Releases page](https://emberjs.com/releases/), releases any relevant

>   [Deprecations](https://deprecations.emberjs.com/), and finally coordinates and

Reviewer: I assume these projects do not have previous packages as dependencies, right?

Author: Sorry, I'm not clear on what you mean!

  releases the [release blog post](https://blog.emberjs.com/tag/releases).

> 

Reviewer: Not sure if there's time but I would see valuable to illustrate a graph of dependencies between each project:

(ember-source) ---> (ember-data) --> (ember-cli)  
      |_________________________________⤴   
        
=> (Guides + API docs + Releases page + Deprecations + Blog Post)

Author: If someone can help me put one together quickly that sounds like a good addition!

Reviewer 2: @locks if you make a sketch on paper and take a photo, you can send that to @emmasofiah2o and she can have the designer make a proper graphic out of it.

> The release blog post marks the official release of a new project version, since
> it means that all of the sub-projects and relevant documentation is ready and
> tests for developers to use and consult.

Reviewer: I don't understand what you mean by with `tests` in L45, but probably is something I'm not catching with my English... I rephrase it to show you what I'm understanding you pretended to write but I'm not sure.

```suggestion
The release blog post marks the milestones of the official release of a new project version. It means that all of the sub-projects are tested, released, they have relevant documentation so they are ready for developers to use and consult.
```

Reviewer: Maybe it could be interesting to link an example of a blog post on Ember so people can read it and see?

Author: I think I meant "ready and tested". Does that read clearly?

### The Learning team process

As you might have noticed in the list above, the Learning team touches on
several projects during the course of the release process. The team maintains a
handbook with all the steps of the
[Ember release process](https://github.com/ember-learn/handbook/blob/main/ember-releases.md).

> At the time of writing, they are:

Reviewer: Added permalink of the moment you created the post, not sure if you see it valuable or is already clear with the text itself:

```suggestion
[At the time of writing](https://github.com/ember-learn/handbook/blob/3ff7f36e6848ac9118a65d86f959dca828513bdc/ember-releases.md), they are:
```

Author: I think it might be confusing to have two links to the handbook one after the other. I also want people to go to the most up to date release process, so I think I'll take the risk that the text is clear enough 😁

1. Guides
2. API documentation
3. Release blog post
4. Release pages
5. Deprecations
6. Upgrade Guide
7. Glitch Ember starter
8. Ember Wikipedia
9. Release bot

The steps are a mix of easily automated tasks and tasks that necessitate manual
intervention.

> We started automating this process by creating bash scripts for the Guides

Reviewer: We vs They depending on previous comment about the person used to write articles in simplabs' blog

project. Essentially they codify the manual steps with minimal interface and
error handling around them. The scripts assume that you have the project cloned
and does some housekeeping to make sure you don't accidentally lose any work you
were doing when you trigger the release script. This will be relevant later on.

Codifying the steps in bash was a big improvement, but we ran into some minor
issues. The first of which is that bash is not a language the developer in the
team are deeply familiar with. This is fine for small scripts, but as soon as
you try to introduce error handling and better ergonomics for the caller of the
script, it becomes considerably harder to write the necessary bash code.

The other reason is that bash is not natively supported on Windows. There are ways to run bash on Windows systems, but we wanted to reduce incidental dependencies in order to make releases portable and easier for the user.

So to run all of the steps you would need to clone the relevant repositories and follow the release handbook line by line to make sure you get the order correct.

## Creating tool-new-release

> There was still a lot of automation left on the table, so I got to work figuring out how to improve the situation. When picking a technology I had already excluded Bash for the reasons covered. I also discarded Node.js as I don't find the programming model suited for these sorts of scripting tasks, and I had bad experiences previously, particularly around packages that require native extensions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There was still a lot of automation left on the table, so I/we/they/impersonal? got to work figuring out how to improve the situation. When picking a technology I/we/they? had already excluded Bash for the reasons covered. I/we/they/impersonal? also discarded Node.js as I/we/they/impersonal? don't find the programming model suited for these sorts of scripting tasks, and I/we/they/impersonal? had bad experiences previously, particularly around packages that require native extensions.
```

I will stop mentioning this in the document, but I would review in general the pronoun/person to use along the document

> At the time I was dabbling in Rust and had already make a couple of tools for myself using that language, so I decided to give Rust a go. Picking Rust also had the benefit of giving me a single binary that a maintainer can download and run, not having to deal with runtime and dependencies versions. And so, work started on [tool-new-release](https://github.com/ember-learn/tool-new-release/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At the time I was dabbling in [Rust](https://www.rust-lang.org/) and had already make a couple of tools for myself using that language, so I decided to give Rust a go. Picking Rust also had the benefit of giving me a single binary that a maintainer can download and run, not having to deal with runtime and dependencies versions. And so, work started on [tool-new-release](https://github.com/ember-learn/tool-new-release/).
```

### First steps

> 

Reviewer: What do you think about adding 4th level titles? It would be too much? I see it interesting to encapsulate these 3:
#### Shelling out
#### Providing Command-line arguments
#### Operating with Git

Determined to make the tool useful with as little effort as possible and then iterate, I started out by shelling out using [`std::process::Command`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/process/struct.Command.html) from Rust's standard library. While shelling out did not improve on the portability problem, making the tool do something useful was a motivator to keep developing it.

> Next I added [`structopt`](https://docs.rs/structopt/0.3.23/structopt/) to provide command-line argument parsing. This would be useful to allow the user to select which project they want to run the release steps for, to provide the target version, and more. `structopt` makes it really straightforward to implement interfaces using native Rust structures. Here's an example of a `--project` flag that accepts either `Guides` or `Api` as values:

Reviewer: 💡 I would see valuable to attach a video/screenshot of the command-line prompt in action (maybe a comparison with previous bash version if there was any?) instead of ```bash``` copy paste?

```rust
#[derive(Debug, StructOpt)]
enum Project {
    Guides,
    Api,
}

/// Ember Learning team release helper.
#[derive(Debug, StructOpt)]
struct Opts {
    /// Pick which step to run the deploy pipeline for.
    #[structopt(short, long)]
    project: Option<Project>,
}
```

> I want to note that this also gives us documentation:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I want to note that this also gives us `--help` command out of the box:
```

FLAGS:
    -h, --help             Prints help information
    -V, --version          Prints version information

OPTIONS:
    -p, --project <project>    Pick which project to run the deploy pipeline for [possible values: Guides, Api]
```

Next, I needed a library to handle `git` operations, as I did not want to shell out. I needed `git` because I decided that in order for the tool to be more resilient and straightforward to use, it should clone the relevant repositories. This meant that we would get the most up-to-date changes in the repositories, as well as negate the need to do housekeeping to ensure any local changes to the repositories were not lost. I picked [`git2-rs`](https://docs.rs/git2/0.13.22/git2/) and updated the code to use it wherever necessary.

Now that I had the basics of the tool working for Guides and API documentation, it was time to make it available for other people.

### Releasing the tool

I wanted the tool to be useable from Linux, Windows and macOS so I had to figure out a way to build the Rust project to those targets.
Since the project is hosted on GitHub, I could use GitHub Actions to build the project for me, and then make a release.

> It took some researching, but thankfully I was able to pool together a couple of articles and GitHub actions to come up with a pipeline. You can see what the GitHub Action workflows currently look like in the repository's [`workflows` directory](https://github.com/ember-learn/tool-new-release/tree/main/.github/workflows) and if you have any suggestions, please let me know! Everything about the project is very much a work in progress and not optimal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It took some researching, but thankfully I was able to pool together a couple of articles and [GitHub Actions](https://github.com/features/actions) to come up with a pipeline. You can see what the GitHub Action workflows currently look like in the repository's [`workflows` directory](https://github.com/ember-learn/tool-new-release/tree/main/.github/workflows) and if you have any suggestions, please let me know! Everything about the project is very much a work in progress and not optimal.
```

Reviewer: Which article/s?

```suggestion
It took some researching, but thankfully I was able to pool together [a couple of articles](url) and GitHub actions to come up with a pipeline. You can see what the GitHub Action workflows currently look like in the repository's [`workflows` directory](https://github.com/ember-learn/tool-new-release/tree/main/.github/workflows) and if you have any suggestions, please let me know! Everything about the project is very much a work in progress and not optimal.
```

> It took some researching, but thankfully I was able to pool together a couple of articles and GitHub actions to come up with a pipeline. You can see what the GitHub Action workflows currently look like in the repository's [`workflows` directory](https://github.com/ember-learn/tool-new-release/tree/main/.github/workflows) and if you have any suggestions, please let me know! Everything about the project is very much a work in progress and not optimal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It took some researching, but thankfully I was able to pool together a couple of articles and GitHub actions to come up with a pipeline. You can see what the GitHub Action workflows currently look like in the repository's [`workflows` directory](https://github.com/ember-learn/tool-new-release/tree/main/.github/workflows) and if you have any suggestions, please [let me know](https://twitter.com/@locks)! Everything about the project is very much a work in progress and not optimal.
```

> Two things I'd like to point out in the workflow is that I ended up using [`musl`](https://musl.libc.org/) through `rustup` in order to build the Linux binary, and that I'm currently publishing the binary as a _draft_, so it won show up on the homepage of the repository.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Two things I'd like to point out in the workflow are:

- I ended up using [`musl`](https://musl.libc.org/) through `rustup` in order to build the Linux binary
- I'm currently publishing the binary as a _draft_, so it won't show up on the homepage of the repository.
```

Reviewer: Could you explain a little bit more about `musl`? Is not clear to me why you had to use it. What was the problem you were facing?

Not sure if it would be too deep for your article, but at least for my knowledge :)

## Next steps

- github actions
- windows, linux, and macOS
   -https://jondot.medium.com/building-rust-on-multiple-platforms-using-github-6f3e6f8b8458

## Future work

- codify Guides steps in Rust instead
- resume feature like `git rebase`

> - more error handling

Reviewer: I assume these are the WIP sections

Author: I cleaned this up and added a "see you in the next post" closing paragraph. What do you think?

---
title: 'Automating Ember releases with Rust'
author: 'Ricardo Mendes'
github: locks
twitter: locks
topic: ember
bio: 'Senior Frontend Engineer, Ember Framework and Learning Core teams member'
description:
  'Ricardo Mendes discusses a command-line tool built in Rust that automates the
  releases process for the Ember Core Learning Team'
og:
  image: /assets/images/posts/2021-10-18-automating-ember-learning-releases-with-rust/og-image.png
---

It's not trivial to release a new version of Ember. This process involves
several different core teams, who are responsible for several packages and
resources between them. In this post we will go through how I used Rust to build
the tool that is used to automate part of the Ember release.

> 

Author: Updated!

---
title: 'Automating Ember Core Learning Team releases with Rust'
author: 'Ricardo Mendes'
github: locks
twitter: locks
topic: ember
bio: 'Senior Frontend Engineer, Ember Framework and Learning Core teams member'
description:
  'Ricardo Mendes discusses a command like tool built in Rust that automates the
  releases process for the Ember Core Learning Team'
og:

>   image: /assets/images/posts/2021-07-13-effective-infrastructure-for-efficient-development-workflows/og-image.png

Reviewer 2: Let's make a new illustration for this. @emmasofiah2o can you have the Upwork designer make one? @locks can give you some info on what would be suitable.

---

It's not trivial to release a new version of Ember. This process involves
several different core teams, Framework, Data, CLI and Learning, who are
responsible for several packages and resources between them. In this post
we will go through the process of building a tool in Rust to automate the
process for the Core Learning Team.

<!--break-->

![Effective infrastructure for efficient development workflows illustration](/assets/images/posts/2021-07-13-effective-infrastructure-for-efficient-development-workflows/illustration.svg#full)

## Release process for the Ember project

An Ember project release involves 4 different Core teams, Framework, Data, CLI

> and Learning. The release is usually done over the period of a week, because

Author: I removed the team listing from the intro so I can keep it here. Does that address your concern?

issues. The first of which is that bash is not a language the developer in the
team are deeply familiar with. This is fine for small scripts, but as soon as
you try to introduce error handling and better ergonomics for the caller of the
script, it becomes considerably harder to write the necessary bash code.

The other reason is that bash is not natively supported on Windows. There are
ways to run bash on Windows systems, but we wanted to reduce incidental
dependencies in order to make releases portable and easier for the user.

So to run all of the steps you would need to clone the relevant repositories and
follow the release handbook line by line to make sure you get the order correct.

## Creating tool-new-release

There was still a lot of automation left on the table, so I got to work figuring
out how to improve the situation. When picking a technology I had already
excluded Bash for the reasons covered. I also discarded Node.js as I don't find
the programming model suited for these sorts of scripting tasks, and I had bad
experiences previously, particularly around packages that require native
extensions.

> At the time I was dabbling in Rust and had already make a couple of tools for

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
At the time I was dabbling in Rust and had already made a couple of tools for
```

run, not having to deal with runtime and dependencies versions. And so, work
started on [tool-new-release](https://github.com/ember-learn/tool-new-release/).

### First steps

#### Handling Git

The first things I needed were a library to handle `git` operations, and a
library to generate temporary folders that I could clone the repositories into.
The decision to clone the relevant repositories into temporary folders was
twofold: ensure the tool is working with the most recent commits of the
repository, and clean up the repositories after the tool was done running. I
decided to go with [`git2-rs`](https://docs.rs/git2/0.13.22/git2/) and
[`tempfile`](https://docs.rs/tempfile/3.2.0/tempfile/), which looks something
like this:

```rust
use tempfile::tempdir;
use git2::Repository;

let folder = tempdir().unwrap().into_path();
folder.push("guides-source");
let repo = Repository::clone("https://github.com/ember-learn/guides-source.git", &folder)?;
```

In the actual tool a temporary folder is created at the top that is then fed to
the different steps so they can manage the cloning they need to do.

#### Shelling out

> Determined to have a viable release tool as quickly as possible as possible and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Determined to have a viable release tool as quickly as possible and
```
